---
title: "Broad-Area Search of New Construction Using Time Series Analysis"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-construction-search
excerpt: 'Detects new construction activities using Landsat and Sentinel-2 time series.'
date: 2024-01-01
venue: 'Science of Remote Sensing'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.srs.2024.100138'
citation: 'Tang, X. et al. (2024). "Broad-area-search of new construction using time series analysis of Landsat and Sentinel-2 data." <i>Science of Remote Sensing</i>, 9, 100138.'
---

New construction activities can alter surface albedo and structure, which then affect surface temperature and roughness, and hence have a significant impact on urban climate. Construction activity is also an important indicator of human development and movement and is of high interest to the intelligence community. A new approach for Broad-Area-Search of New Construction activities (BASC) by combining time series analysis and rule-based filters using Landsat data was developed and tested in five selected cities (Boston, Shanghai, São Paulo, Dubai, and Ho Chi Minh City). The algorithm transforms Landsat images into fractions of a set of four endmembers using Linear Spectral Mixture Analysis (LSMA) and then applies the Continuous Change Detection and Classification (CCDC) algorithm for change detection. A set of rule-based filters and spatial processing was then applied to narrow the search to changes related to construction activities. Overall, BASC reached a recall of 0.83, a precision of 0.58, and an F1-Score of 0.68. Among the five cities, Dubai had the highest recall of 1.0 and the highest F1-score of 0.75, while Boston had the highest precision of 0.63. BASC performed worst in Shanghai with an F1-Score of 0.6, mainly due to it having the lowest recall of 0.62, while São Paulo has the lowest precision of 0.5. Common sources of omission errors include low-density, redevelopment, and small sites, while common commission errors include roofing, land clearing, water level changes, and re-surfacing projects. For comparison, BASC using Sentinel-2 Top-of-Atmosphere (TOA) Reflectance data recorded an overall F1-Score of 0.63, but with higher recall and lower precision. Integration of Sentinel-2 Surface Reflectance and Sentinel-1 SAR data has the potential to further improve the performance of BASC. The new algorithm provided a method for routine monitoring of construction activities over large areas. The result of such monitoring can be used as a baseline to narrow down the candidate targets of construction activities, where very high-resolution imagery can then be requested to perform further examination.
